---
title: When it comes to startups, being second is underrated
description: Founding a company is not for everyone.
date: 2021-07-25
tags:
  - startups
---

There are plenty of great reasons to start a company. The freedom to realize
your own ideas can be incredibly empowering, and although the chance of failure
is high, the potential rewards are significant.

Because of ~~these merits~~ capitalism, the startup world unsurprisingly puts a
lot of emphasis on starting your own business. Indeed, startup veterans like YC
founder Paul Graham dedicate their careers to enticing young people into the
world of entrepreneurship. Graham's 2007 blog post [Why to Not Not Start a
Startup](http://www.paulgraham.com/notnot.html) is the prime example of
catalytic startup recruitment, designed to motivate aspiring founders into
taking the leap. Today, it remains the starting point in YC's Startup School
Curriculum.

Graham's essay is derived from talks at the University of Berkeley, and in
essence _that is the target audience_: young college grads. "Why to Not Not
Start a Startup" fails to examine the plethora of reasons why the average person
(esp. those from less privileged groups) may be unable to afford the financial
and familial risks of starting a company.

With so much emphasis on being _Employee #1_, people often overlook the next
best thing, which for the vast majority of people is actually the better option.
Enter _Employee #2_.

## Employee #2

It should come as no surprise that Employee #2 is overlooked. How many people
remember the athlete who won silver instead of gold? And I bet that most people
can name the first person to walk on the surface of the moon, but how many can
remember the name of the second?

Employee #2 is not a founder, but they're close. My own definition for this is
anyone joining a startup in its nascent stages who is not a founding member.
These people will usually be salaried, and compared to employees that join at
later stages (with some exceptions for C-level executives), be given generous
stock option packages.

While Employee #2 might not have come up with the idea, they joined so early
that the target problem is likely far from being solved. Like the founders, they
get to explore, learn, and ideate on exciting issues, as well as achieve some
level of autonomy is their everyday work. Unlike the founders however, they
bypass the stage of highest risk, and if the company does well have the
opportunity to share in that success.

The real value in a #2 position is in essence the balance between **risk** (and
being able to **de-risk**), **reward**, and **freedom**.

## De-risk

As I mentioned earlier, risk is a leading factor in why someone might be unable
to start their own company. For many people, a salary can be an uncompromising
necessity. It is unreasonable to assume that a person supporting a family is
able to take on the same level of risk as a recent college grad. And even
college grads have different risk tolerances; a grad with zero student debt will
be able to afford more risk than a grad with debt.

The risk of starting a company can take on other forms too. Some individuals
aspiring to found a company may risk ostracization from parents who perceive it
as a waste of time and energy.

By positioning yourself as an early hire, you can bypass the founding stages of
a company where there might have been little or no income. And while startups at
this stage are usually far from achieving product market fit and creating
long-term stability, they have come far enough to generate money. If there is
money, there is a good chance the startup is VC funded, and thus would have gone
through some vetting process too. (That being said this does not guarantee
success as VCs expect the majority of companies in their portfolio to fail.)

## Reward

While founders are obviously going to benefit the most from any share
liquidation event, options granted to early employees are nothing to scoff at.
And they need to be; in the startup world a competitive options package is the
default. Not only that, but without this extra incentive, a startup could not
hope to compete with deep-pocketed tech giants like FAANG (Facebook, Amazon,
Apple, Netflix, Google).

To me, this balance between risk and reward has always been the perfect sweet
spot. If you were to graph it, it would look something like this.

<BlogImage src={GraphImg} alt="Stability vs Reward" caption="Stability and
reward over a company's lifecycle." />

In the graph you can see that both stability and reward are plotted against
company stage. Both curves can be thought of as logarithmic. Traditionally, the
number of options granted will be the most for founders, and sharply decrease
for subsequent employees until the option grants eventually plateau.

Job stability can be thought of as the inverse. Since the founders took on the
most amount risk, they had the least stability, but are able to profit the most.
As more people join the company, stability increases, and eventually in late
stage plateaus. (This is of course generalized since stability can of course
vary even for well-established companies.)

Where the two curves meet is where I think the sweet spot lies. Since both
curves are logarithmic, equilibrium is likely to be in the early stage of
company growth, somewhere in the first few hires.

## Freedom

From my own experiences of joining early-stage startups, this is one of the most
overlooked advantages of not being a founder.

It may seem counter intuitive, but founders often have less freedom than
employees. First there are the work hours. The founder who works 40 hour weeks
with 3 weeks vacation is a rare breed.

And while founders may be at the top of a company, it is not as though they are
accountable to no one. If the startup takes venture capital, the founders will
relinquish a degree of control in the form of board seats, as well as preferred
stock options. A VC may control a company even if the founders maintain more
than 50% ownership of the company.

Employees have more freedom when it comes to leaving the company as well. There
is no risk of upsetting investors, or the general harmony of a company. You are
able to give your notice and leave.

Some would argue that being able to choose your own idea and direct its
execution offers more freedom than being an employee that executes on said idea.
While this may be, there is an incredible amount of freedom in being able to
choose which startup to work for. Chances are that regardless of your interests,
a startup exists that is tackling some problem in that domain.

## Final thoughts

If you are able to start a company and accept the associated risks, then by all
means you should. For the rest of us, I hope this presents a useful alternative,
one that can be (almost) as rewarding, but with less risk.

What’s more, this approach might be the stepping stone you need to launch into
entrepreneurship. Working for someone else’s startup is an amazing learning
opportunity, and if it is successful then that could very well fund your own
endeavours in the future.
